The Project Gutenberg EBook of Introduction to Our Bird Friends, Volume 1, by 
Lenwood Ballard Carson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Introduction to Our Bird Friends, Volume 1

Author: Lenwood Ballard Carson

Illustrator: Orville O. Rice

Release Date: February 5, 2020 [EBook #61319]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INTRO TO OUR BIRD FRIENDS, VOL 1 ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                    INTRODUCTION TO OUR BIRD FRIENDS


                          Text by L. B. Carson
                    Illustrations by Orville O. Rice

                            Copyright, 1954
                      BY CAPPER PUBLICATIONS, INC.

                Printed in the United States of America

                         Published August 1954
                Second Printing (Revised), December 1954
                       Third Printing, April 1955
                     Fourth Printing, January 1956
                        Fifth Printing, May 1956
                        Sixth Printing, May 1957




                                FOREWORD


More and more people are turning to the outdoors and the enjoyment of
nature. Many great Americans have been students of wild birds. This is
not accidental, for few forms of outdoor recreation offer so much
pleasure.

The _season_ of the year will in some cases determine what birds are in
your area. _Color_ is important in identifying species. Look carefully
at the _silhouette_ or _shape_; is it slender or chunky, is the tail
short or long? Compare its _size_ with a bird with which you are more
familiar. _Habitat_ is important, too. One learns to look for Red-winged
Blackbirds in wet marshes; for a meadowlark in pastures and fields.
_Behavior_ is a clue. Does it walk or hop; does it soar, does it walk
headfirst down a tree, as is the habit of the nuthatch, or scratch among
leaves like the towhee? Listen to the bird’s _song_ and _call note_.
With a little experience, distinctive songs may be identified. Each bird
has its characteristic song.

Bird study can be pursued with as much effort as the watcher cares to
exert. Birds need food, water and protection from their natural enemies.
You can provide these in your own yard. Some birds will be attracted and
you can study them at your leisure. Other species, those which live in
swamps, for example, must be searched for aggressively.

A bird guide is a splendid investment, considering the hours of pleasure
it will bring you. Binoculars are a help, too, in studying the size,
shape, beak, legs and color pattern.

Make written notes of what you see and hear, or a dated list of species
and numbers of each. Records will add to your own pleasure and add to
the sum of knowledge on birds in general.

This is the first of two booklets on common birds of the United States
published by Capper Publications, Inc. Each of the two volumes
illustrates and describes 50 different species. Additional copies
(specify whether volume I or II is desired) may be ordered for 25 cents
each as follows:

  Bird Book Department 1-6
  Capper Publications, Inc.
  8th and Jackson Streets
  Topeka, Kansas


Pied-billed Grebe
_Podilymbus podiceps_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

It makes little difference to this bird whether you call him
“Water-witch, Hell-diver, Dabchick or Pied-billed Grebe,” for these are
only a few of the names by which he is known. His only concern is
finding a pond, lake or other water, well supplied with crayfish,
minnows or insects on which he feeds. Leeches are a favorite morsel.

The short, thick bill of this grebe is distinctive, even in winter when
the black encircling band from which it gets its name, is missing.
General appearance is brown, being brownish-black above, lighter brown
and white below. On water the short tail usually is carried high enough
to show the white under-tail coverts.

This grebe is perfectly adjusted to water and can swim, dive or lower
his body in water just as far as desired with little effort, often
showing only bill and eyes above the surface. This protects him from
predators or hunters who might mistake him for a duck. Even his nest is
a floating structure so placed that he can gain the safety of his
natural element.

Wet pavements are hazardous for they resemble water and if the
Pied-billed Grebe lands there, he is helpless. His legs are placed too
far back on his body for walking and he finds it difficult to regain the
air except by skittering over water.

  He sinks or dives
  Without a care,
  For water hides
  His daily fare.


Great Blue Heron
_Ardea herodias_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Altho protected by the Federal Migratory Bird Treaty, this heron often
finds himself the target for thoughtless hunters. Not that he would make
a tasty dish, but any bird which stands 4 feet high with a wing spread
of almost 70 inches is in constant danger. His favorite feeding grounds
are wet meadows or pastures, ponds, lakes or streams. Most of his food
consists of rough fish which he catches expertly, either standing
patiently in shallow water until a fish appears, or walking slowly along
the edge of some shallow pond until he discovers his prey. Snakes,
frogs, insects, mice, eels, or even small birds are not safe from a
hungry heron.

Unlike cranes, which fly with necks outstretched, herons fold their
necks back as if resting their heads on their shoulders. Their flight is
a slow, measured beat which carries them to their destination. These
birds seem to prefer tops of tall trees, such as sycamores or
cottonwoods, either in isolated locations or on islands. Favorite sites
are used year after year and nests often cover as much as 3 feet in
space and are placed well out on limbs. A colony of Great Blue Herons is
frequently joined by herons of other species. Such a colony of
fish-eating birds is both noisy and odorous.

  If, when he flies
  He folds his neck,
  The heron is
  The bird to check.


Snow Goose
_Chen hyperborea_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This medium-size goose is the most abundant member of the family and can
be identified by white plumage and black wing tips. He is often called
“wavy,” in the northern part of his range, while southern hunters refer
to him as a “white brant.” His Latin name describes him as “a goose
beyond the north wind.” We see him only as a migrant, either going to
nesting grounds in Northern Canada or returning to his winter home on
the coast of Louisiana and Texas. A somewhat larger relative known as
the Greater Snow Goose, nests in Northern Greenland and winters along
our Atlantic coast.

This bird feeds on roots and bulbs of water plants found in his
wintering area. Grasses, grains or other vegetation bring huge flocks
where they can be seen grazing like tame geese. Feeding flocks are not
welcome to the wheat grower who has fields near lakes which are used as
resting places for migrating birds.

Snow Geese often travel with their near relatives, the Blue Geese. The
gray body and white head of the latter give a color contrast which is
apparent in a mixed flock. These birds interbreed frequently and their
offspring are confusing but usually show more white on the breast than
the Blue Goose parent.

  Like mammoth flakes of drifting snow
  We see you come, we watch you go
  We hear your call like trumpet’s blare
  Which guides the flock in upper air.


Common Mallard
_Anas platyrhynchos_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The Mallard drake with green head, purple chestnut breast, reddish feet,
white collar, black and white tail with a curled feather, combine to
make a colorful duck. The female, more in keeping with her motherly
duties, is content to wear a trim suit of buffy gray, streaked with
brown. The orange to greenish-olive bill and pale orange-red feet give
perfect clues to her identity.

Any pond, puddle, lake or stream is not overlooked by this bird and he
is especially fond of shallow water where he can secure food by tipping
up and extending his neck to muddy bottoms. These ducks are good divers
but if not closely pressed, seem to dive only for pleasure.

The Mallard is not a good father, but leaves his mate soon after she has
started to incubate her eggs. Her nest is well hidden and often found
some distance from water. Her downy young soon can travel and the proud
mother leads them to the nearest body of water as soon as possible.
These trips are hazardous, for predators relish such dainty morsels.
Turtles and fish also take their toll.

Hunters look forward to the fall flight of these ducks for they furnish
a major portion of the annual duck harvest. They soon learn that guns
are dangerous and often feed at night.

  Oh, green-head, with your yellow bill,
  Your rapid flight gives us a thrill
  And when we hear your mate’s loud quack
  We’re always glad that you are back.


Turkey Vulture
_Cathartes aura_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Vultures play an unusual part in nature’s drama. They, along with Sexton
Beetles, other insects and animals, form the sanitary unit. When we
consider the heavy toll of wildlife along our highways, we can
appreciate the usefulness of such a unit. Lacking talons, vultures are
not equipped to catch their prey, but feed on whatever nature provides.

This vulture is almost eagle size, with a wingspread of 70 inches and
can be identified by his long tail, small head, 2-toned wings, and habit
of soaring, the wings forming a dihedral or open V-shape. On close
inspection, you will find the head bare and a reddish color. The young
have blackish heads which is one of the marks of the Black Vulture, but
the latter is smaller with a square tail and shows white spots under the
wing when flying. This is a southern cousin.

No other land bird soars so gracefully. Every air current carries this
bird with little effort on his part. From high in the air, he scans vast
areas for food, not forgetting to check his neighbors who are riding
other currents in like manner. When one bird descends, every vulture in
the air soon joins him.

Whether you call him “Turkey Buzzard, Carrion Crow or Turkey Vulture,”
you will admire his flight.

  Black omen floating far o’erhead,
  Your mission, to remove the dead.
  A useful bird, we must agree
  Whate’er the cost, you’ve earned your fee.


Red-tailed Hawk
_Buteo jamaicensis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Red-tails, like other hawks, show a great variation in plumage. The dark
phase of a Western Red-tail compares favorably with the plumage of an
adult Golden Eagle, but the smaller size and the reddish upper tail
surface which reflects the sun as the bird soars, furnishes the clue.
Typical plumage shows a dark belly-band with bright, reddish upper tail,
while some birds show a light breast and belly.

This bird prefers open woodlands or a dead tree with fields adjoining.
There he may sit for hours, but ever watchful for some movement which
might indicate the presence of a gopher, field mouse, rat or even a
snake. All add to his varied menu. Rodents soon become pests when these
hawks are scarce. This bird often is killed by farmers and poultry
raisers when the real culprit, the Cooper’s Hawk, lives on to enjoy the
flock.

The Red-tail’s size and habit of perching in exposed places make him a
ready target for anyone who carries a gun. Slow flight combined with his
habit of soaring also add to his high death rate.

He adds a few sprigs of green foliage to the mass of sticks, which goes
to make his nest, usually placed in a tall tree near the edge of timber.

  Your great broad wings, red, fan-shaped tail,
  The ease and power with which you sail,
  We recognize a noble clan
  Which spends its life in helping man.


Sparrow Hawk
_Falco sparverius_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This little falcon, about the size of a Robin, is also known as Kestrel.
Calling him a Sparrow-hawk is misleading, for insects and spiders, along
with a generous portion of mice, go to make up his daily fare.
Grasshoppers seem to be a special delicacy. Like other birds, he feeds
on whatever is available. In cities, this includes English Sparrows.

The smallest of the hawk family can be found along highways where he
uses telephone poles, wires or dead trees, while scanning the fields and
fence rows for prey. Dressed in colorful plumage with spotted breast,
slate-blue wings, red-brown back and tail, with head showing 2 black
lines and a dot, he easily is seen and readily identified. The female is
slightly larger, shows more banding on the tail and lacks the blue
wings, hers being browner.

These birds nest in holes in trees or around buildings and join the
Kingbirds, Chimney Swifts and Martins in chasing other predators out of
the neighborhood. Their rapid swallow-like flight makes them a mean
contender in any aerial joust.

The Sparrow Hawk ranges as far north as Southern Canada and winters from
the central states south into South America.

  Your high-pitched call,
  Your rapid flight,
  A friend to man,
  From dawn ’til night.


Prairie Chicken
_Tympanuchus cupido_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Those who live near prairies and brushy grasslands have a chance to
become acquainted with this brown hen-like bird which formerly ranged
over much of the middle west. Cultivation and hunters have reduced the
numbers until they no longer are common. The large size, the short,
dark, rounded tail, the heavily barred underparts, the rounded wings,
all are descriptive of this bird. In flight he reminds you of king-size
Meadow Larks, flapping then sailing, as he journeys to and from favorite
feeding grounds.

In early spring these birds gather in a selected location known as a
“booming ground”; there the males defend a certain area against other
males, yet welcome the hens by strutting, inflating their yellow throat
sacks and erecting the feathers over their heads until they resemble
ears. These antics are accompanied by clucks and a series of 3-noted
hoots which make up their love songs. The males often engage in fighting
to protect their area.

Their food includes insects such as crickets, grasshoppers and beetles
with plenty of roughage such as leaves, seeds and berries. Waste corn,
wheat, rye or sorghums are relished in season. Heavy snows drive the
birds to sumacs and elm buds.

  We hear your call in early morn
  Like measured toots on mellow horn,
  We watch your rhythmic flap ... then sail
  As you descend from hill to vale.


American Coot
_Fulica americana_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This slate-gray bird with white bill and white patch under the tail,
belongs to the rail family but spends more time with ducks. He swims
with a jerky motion of the head, dives like a grebe, walks out on the
shore and eats grass like a goose. Yes, the “mudhen,” for that is what
he is commonly called, is quite versatile. When taking flight, he either
runs into the breeze or skitters across the water for a short distance
until he can gain sufficient speed to gain altitude, then away to
safety.

Coots feed largely on underwater vegetation and prefer algae or musk
grass. Small fish or other aquatic animals are eaten on occasion while
grass, grain or weeds are not overlooked. When diving for food, these
birds often are robbed by the American Widgeon, or Baldpate, which
relishes such juicy morsels but does not dive. Coots take such invasions
as a matter of course.

They build nests of dried leaves of marsh plants, usually on a floating
structure, either well hidden or rather open, depending on the habitat
available.

Coots have large, greenish feet, with long-lobed toes, not webbed like
ducks or geese, but just as useful for walking or swimming.

  He feels at home
  Where’er he goes
  But likes a pond
  Where algae grows.


Killdeer
_Charadrius vociferus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The killdeer is the common plover which we see in pastures, meadows,
fields or on shores of ponds and lakes. Freshly mown alfalfa fields,
short grass or stubble, even newly plowed fields attract them. They
gather in loose flocks to feed on exposed insects or worms. Their usual
pace consists of a short run, a quick stop to check for some juicy
morsel, then another short run. All stops are accompanied by a jerky
movement as if undecided whether to spring into the air or stay on the
ground. Even the spindly legged young have this bobbing habit.

This bird is only a little bigger than the Robin, but longer legs and
tail make him appear larger. White collar with 2 black bands across the
lower neck and upper breast, chestnut back and tail, white lines in the
wings in flight, all make this plover easily identified. If there is any
doubt you will soon hear his “kill-dee,” or “kill-deer” notes, for he is
a noisy bird, quick to resent any intrusion in his territory. These
calls alert other birds, much to the disgust of duck hunters who are
trying to make a quiet approach to their blinds.

Nests are placed in open spots on the ground and lined with pebbles or
grasses. Eggs are protectively colored and not easily found.

  Two black bands, on breast so white
  Rusty tail, which shows in flight,
  That you would kill a deer’s absurd
  But that is what you say, I’ve heard.


Spotted Sandpiper
_Actitis macularia_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Any pond, lake or stream will be visited sooner or later by these little
sandpipers. You find them teetering along shores, picking up insects and
small crustacea which form the diet. Mud banks, sandy shores, pebbly
mountain streams, half-sunken logs, all furnish happy hunting grounds.

The teetering tail is distinctive and no other sandpiper has the round
black spots on his breast and none has the fluttering flight. They seem
to tip-toe thru the air with very short wingbeats. Young and adults in
winter plumage do not show the spots but continue to teeter. They often
show a white spot just above the bend of the wing when in this plumage.
Their usual note is a 2-tone “peet-weet,” which it utters when flushed
from its feeding ground.

These birds nest in a variety of places, sometimes well hidden but often
in more open situations but always in a slight depression in the ground.
Their 4 eggs are protectively colored and are sometimes found some
distance from water. The young teeter to the closest stream, led by the
ever-watchful mother. There you will find them busily engaged in
gathering food. They can swim or even dive, if necessary.

  Wee wader with the spotted breast
  We wonder if you ever rest,
  “Peet-weet,” is what you seem to say
  As you go bobbing on your way.


Black Tern
_Chlidonias niger_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This tern is distinctive, especially in summer plumage when the black
head and body, short, slightly notched tail, slate-gray wings, combined
with the erratic flight, tells us it has to be a Black Tern. In winter
plumage these birds have white heads and bodies with backs and wings
darker than other terns. They show dark spots around the eyes and back
of neck. In fall migration you find birds of this species in various
stages of dress, but there are usually a few which carry enough black to
give a clue to their identity.

They nest in inland marshes and around lakes, forming loose colonies on
favorite nesting sites. Floating vegetation, muskrat houses, in fact
most any structure strong enough to support a nest is used.

Black Terns feed on larger insects such as moths, grasshoppers,
dragonflies and water insects which they obtain from the air or by
gliding down and picking them from the water. They can be seen flying
over the fields like swallows or nighthawks, feeding as they go. When
flying over lakes, they often hover then glide to the surface for
minnows or insects.

These terns spend the winter in South America and migrate earlier than
some species. They also arrive later from their winter homes.

  What are those birds, we’d like to know,
  Which fly like swallows, black as crow?
  Twisting, turning, then a glide,
  To pluck some morsel which they’ve spied.


Mourning Dove
_Zenaidura macroura_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

There is something about a dove which makes you want to know him better.
Could it be his low mournful call? (And why do we call it mournful?
Someone described it in that manner, and while it is not as colorful as
other bird notes, it has a restful and pleasing quality.) Could it be
the graceful flight which shows the pointed tail with the white
trimming? Could it be dainty steps which seem to fit his personality?
Perhaps the way he drinks by inserting his bill and swallowing water
until he has his fill. It might be the way he builds his nest: no time
wasted when this bird constructs a home. It might even be the way he
jerks his head, as if trying to get a better focus on the sights of the
world.

Some call him brown; if so, where did we get the description, “dove
colored”? In good light, the head and neck have a rich sheen which
blends with the rest of the body. All in all, he is a beautiful bird.

He nests in almost any spot which suits his fancy, on the ground, in
evergreens, around buildings, well out on a limb or in the crotch of a
tree, but always in a loosely constructed home, unless he takes over
some well constructed nest, made by others.

His food consists mostly of weed seeds.

  Altho you make a mournful sound
  We’re glad to know that you’re around.
  We like your shy confiding way
  And only hope you’re here to stay.


Yellow-billed Cuckoo
_Coccyzus americanus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This slim, long-tailed bird is far more common than people suspect for
he seldom is seen. He prefers to move slowly thru the heavy foliage,
peering under each branch and leaf for the leaf-eating worms which form
his diet. Wooly worms, which other birds seem to shun, are relished by
him. His long bill is a perfect tool for breaking into webs where he
creates havoc with the wiggly inhabitants.

Cuckoos are larger than Robins and their long tails make them look even
longer than the 12¼ inches which they measure. They fly directly from
the center of one tree to the next, thus giving us a chance to check the
rufous coloring of the wings and the large white spots on the ends of
their black tails. The back is dark gray while the breast and belly are
white. The yellow lower bill, the rufous wings and larger white spots on
the tail are the main difference between this and the slightly smaller
Black-billed Cuckoo. Both have a series of clucking notes but the
Yellow-billed Cuckoo song gets slower, then runs down the scale,
different from his relative’s long efforts.

Unlike the Old-World cuckoos which depend on other birds to rear their
young, the Yellow-billed builds a nest, altho it is flimsy. There, the 3
or 4 young get their start in life.

  Slow moving, with a watchful eye,
  Straight as an arrow, when you fly,
  You’re seldom seen, but often heard,
  Elusive for so large a bird.


Screech Owl
_Otus asio_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The Screech Owl is the smallest of the eared owls, about robin size. In
fact he often nests in holes built by larger woodpeckers such as
flickers. Like other owls, he hunts at night when his quavering call
blends with the murmur of the night breeze. Mice, shrews, beetles,
moths, crayfish, frogs and small birds seem to furnish a well-rounded
diet.

These small owls have 2 distinct color phases, one a rich brown, the
other a soft gray. Both blend with the bark of trees thus giving them
protection. This is one of the mysteries of the bird world. Just why do
these owls wear different colors? Both colors are often found in the
same brood.

Even tho small, they give a good account of themselves and soon let you
know when they have young in the vicinity. The parents defend their
young against all comers and often surprise innocent persons who may
stroll too close to the young only to be attacked by the irate parents.

This bird prefers open woodlands, orchards and clearings and often
spends the day in the same cavities which are used for nesting. Some
even spend the day in evergreens, but soon attract the attention of
other birds which hate all owls and soon make their feelings known.

  Mysterious birds
  In every way,
  Sometimes they’re brown,
  Sometimes they’re gray.


Nighthawk
_Chordeiles minor_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

He’s not a hawk, but like other members of the Goatsucker family, often
feeds at night. This gray-brown, robin size bird with white bars across
the wings, often is called a “bull-bat.” Early morning and late evenings
seem to be favorite feeding times for then insects on which he feeds,
are on the wing. During the day you will find him sitting horizontally
on some sheltered limb, his colors blending perfectly. He looks more
like a knot or broken stub than a bird. He leaves his resting place with
a glide and then goes into his distinctive flight.

The Nighthawk often ascends high in the sky with a series of quick wing
beats, each accompanied by his call of a nasal “peent.” When the desired
height is attained, he folds his wings slightly and dives with a booming
sound. This is a part of the breeding display.

Nests are no problem, for this bird prefers a graveled flat roof or some
similar open space where a slight depression furnishes ample protection
for the eggs. The mother shelters her eggs and young from the blistering
sun which beats down.

  We watch your flight on white-barred wing
  And hear the notes, you try to sing,
  But there’s one thing, we’d hate to try
  Your way of diving from the sky.


Chimney Swift
_Chaetura pelagica_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Unlike swallows which bend their wings, this bird holds his wings
straight, but the natural curve gives the appearance of a bow. The long
wings make him appear larger than the small sparrow size which he
attains. This sooty-black swift is the only member of his family which
visits the eastern part of America and since he has adopted chimneys as
his favorite nesting and roosting sites, he is not hard to find.

Few birds seem so perfectly fitted for living in the air and except when
nesting or roosting, there is where he will be found. When flying, he
looks almost like a bird without head or tail but if you will examine
him closely you will find a short tail with spines which combined with
his sharp claws, help anchor him to the flat inner surface of chimneys.
Nests consist of small twigs which he snaps off the end of some dead
limb while flying by, then glues to the chimney with saliva. This does
not make an imposing structure, but is ample for safety of eggs and
young.

The swift is a fast flier and combines long circular glides with quick
wing beats and sharp turns, this erratic flight accompanied by a series
of sharp, clicking notes which aids in identification. While drinking or
bathing each bird glides down, each hitting the water in turn.

  “Cigar with wings,”
  You hear folks say,
  As he darts past
  On summer’s day.


Ruby-throated Hummingbird
_Archilochus colubris_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This, the smallest bird found in the area, can be confused only with
large moths such as the sphinx or hawk moths. Both the moths and
hummingbirds like to feed on deep-throated flowers such as honeysuckles,
petunias and trumpet-vines but the moths prefer late evening or early
morning while the hummer never passes up a chance to explore such
flowers with his long brush-like tongue with which he gathers nectar.
This combined with small insects and spiders goes to make up his diet.
Brightly colored phials filled with sugar water will attract him to your
yard.

Hummingbirds are among the best fliers of the bird world and can hover,
fly backward or forward or straight away, whatever meets their fancy.
The male has a green back and in some lights the throat patch looks
black only to flash ruby red when the bird changes position so the light
is reflected. The female is duller and has white feather tips on the
tail.

The female builds one of the daintiest of nests on top of some sloping
branch, using lichens and spider web to attach the cup to the limb. This
little nest which is only 1½ inches in diameter is not often found for
it has the appearance of being only a part of the branch. Two young
constitute the usual family.

  A little jewel
  With buzzy wings,
  He only squeaks
  Whene’er he sings.


Belted Kingfisher
_Megaceryle alcyon_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Rarely in the bird world, is the female more colorful than the male. The
Belted Kingfisher is one example, for the female sports brown flanks and
breastband in addition to the blue-gray belt worn by her mate. These
birds, larger than Robins, can be confused only with the Blue Jay;
however, their plumage is blue-gray. Near creeks, ponds, lakes or other
bodies of water they may be seen flying low over the water or hovering
momentarily before plunging after some minnow, crayfish or other food
which has attracted their attention. They have choice perches over the
water and fly from one spot to another, always on the lookout for unwary
prey. They are rather solitary in habits, each pair defending its
territory against all comers.

The large head and beak, uneven crest, habit of flapping and sailing,
the series of call notes often referred to as a rattle, are distinctly
kingfisher. Nesting holes are dug in steep banks and extend several feet
before ending in an enlarged space which holds the eggs and young. Both
birds help with the digging using their strong bills to loosen the dirt
and their flatly constructed feet to kick it out.

Kingfishers eat small fry which abound in such numbers that a natural
check is desirable.

  Up and down
  The creek he goes.
  With rattled call
  To warn his foes.


Downy Woodpecker
_Dendrocopos pubescens_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The sparrow-size Downy Woodpecker resembles his robin-size cousin, the
Hairy Woodpecker, but his notes are a little softer and his tapping a
little faster for his short bill can produce no such wallop as the
heavy-billed Hairy. The outer tail feathers are barred, instead of the
black and white pattern of the latter. Both males show a red spot on the
nape which is lacking on the females. General coloring is black and
white.

While this friendly little woodpecker relishes suet, he does not let his
visits to your feeder interfere with his constant search for the larvae
which he finds in galls, cornstalks, weed stems or the bark of trees. He
makes a small opening into the tunnel where the larvae are hiding, then
inserts his long tongue and spears the worm. Nature has provided him
with a barbed spear on his long tongue and he uses it constantly in
protecting our trees.

Spring brings much activity for a nesting site must be found, then the
labor of digging a cavity from 8 to 12 inches deep in a post, dead limb
or tree trunk. The home may be near the ground or high in some tree and
often is found with the entrance beneath a limb. There the young are
protected until they can join their parents in their search for insects.

  It seems absurd for such a bird
  To work so hard, we know
  But every worm must learn to turn
  If he expects to grow.


Eastern Kingbird
_Tyrannus tyrannus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The Eastern Kingbird, altho slightly smaller than a Robin, is “monarch
of all he surveys,” and is ready and willing to defend his territory
against all comers. His happiest moments seem to be spent in chasing
hawks, crows, herons or vultures and he is the first to see their
approach and give the alarm. Then, like a fighter-plane, he speeds high
in the air and dives on the intruder. Such aerial attacks are of short
duration for the larger bird soon escapes to a safer location. He then
drops back to his favorite perch, often using such quick wing-beats that
he seems to be tip-toeing thru the air.

This flycatcher with his white breast, dark head, back and wings, and
black tail with white terminal band, is identified easily. He likes to
nest around farm homes or other open country but wants a few open spots
where he can perch while waiting for passing insects. People who raise
bees often refer to him as a “bee-martin,” and accuse him of eating
honeybees. There is little ground for this accusation for only 22
stomachs of 634 examined showed a total of 61 bees eaten and 51 of the
total were drones. On the other hand, this bird eats robber flies which
catch and destroy bees. Eighty-five per cent of his food consists of
insects which includes grasshoppers, crickets and cutworms.

  He tiptoes thru the ozone
  Demure in black and white,
  Let other birds take warning
  For he is dynamite.


Eastern Phoebe
_Sayornis phoebe_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Unlike many of the flycatchers, this bird which is only a little larger
than the English Sparrow, is easily identified. His black bill, lack of
wing bars or eye ring is distinctive but his habit of jerking or waving
his tail is conclusive. The habit of repeating his name over and over in
a low but emphatic tone gives little doubt of his presence. Some people
might confuse this call with the high notes of the Black-capped
Chickadee but when once learned there is little resemblance.

The Phoebe is one of the hardiest of his clan, often wintering in the
southern portion of its nesting range and returning in spring so early
that we often wonder how he can find sufficient flying insects to
sustain life.

The Phoebe likes to place his well-built nest under some sort of a
shelter. Any overhanging cliff, under bridges, even rafters or window
sills are not overlooked as long as some projecting surface furnishes a
place to start the foundation. Mud and moss are the main materials used
for building and this bird knows that such a nest will not stand too
much rough weather.

Two broods usually are raised during the summer and it takes a lot of
small flying insects to keep these healthy youngsters happy, so you are
lucky if he decides to be your neighbor.

  ’Neath bridges or on sheltered walls
  They like to build their nests,
  Then sally forth to catch the bugs
  Which we consider pests.


Horned Lark
_Eremophila alpestris_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

A sparrow-size bird with black tail, which flushes from the road while
you travel along, is the Horned Lark. When you travel slower you will
find that he walks when he moves around, never hopping like birds which
prefer trees. Other marks to look for are a black crown, black line
extending from the beak, curving back and down over the cheek and a
black patch below the white or yellow throat. A white or yellow line,
depending on the subspecies of the bird you see, separates the crown
from the black facial pattern. The horns, from which the bird gets his
name, consist of 2 tufts of feathers extending up from the crown, but
sometimes are hard to see. Body color is brownish above with light
belly.

Horned Larks prefer short-grass country with barren hills or other open
spots such as the sandy shoulders of highways. There you will find them
walking or running in their search for small seeds or insects. When snow
covers the ground they flock to the highways where graders and snowplows
have removed the icy covering.

This, our only true lark, nests early in spring when late snows make
life hazardous. Then you will hear his twittering call as it floats in
on the chilly breeze.

  On barren ground or highway
  He walks with dainty step,
  He dines on seeds and insects
  That’s why he’s full of pep.


Barn Swallow
_Hirundo rustica_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This friendly bird discovered long ago that barns or sheds made
excellent cover for its adobe nest and now you often will find from one
to several of these mud structures neatly plastered on the beams of
buildings. This is a happy arrangement for both the tenant and landlord,
for the swallow more than pays the rent on the space used, not in cash
but in the thousands of insects which make up his food. The swallow gets
whatever protection is offered.

A Barn Swallow is identified easily. No other swallow has the steel-blue
back, the brown spot above the bill with brown throat and belly nor the
deeply forked tail showing white beneath. Another good field mark is the
way he flies with wings bent so the long pointed primaries point back.
He is a swift but erratic flier and it is a pleasure to watch him as he
darts across a field, pond or pasture, searching for flying insects.

His song is a series of twittering notes, rather musical and when once
learned will be easily remembered. Many of the notes have a liquid or
bubbling sound which is distinctive.

Two broods of 4 or 5 young usually are raised during the summer. Fall
brings huge but loose flocks, headed south and feeding as they go, all
headed for South America for the winter.

  The tiny space
  Required by you,
  Seems little pay
  For what you do.


Purple Martin
_Progne subis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This, the largest member of the swallow family, has adopted the
many-roomed apartments which man is glad to furnish. For there are few
people who do not take pleasure in watching the graceful flight of this
bird as he flaps and sails above your trees. His low-pitched, gurgling
notes help to identify him.

They arrive from their winter homes rather early in spring and often are
heard or seen by the latter part of March. Heavy mortality can result
when late snows or icy rains cut down the quota of flying insects which
are his food. As soon as family cares are over, they gather in huge
flocks and soon leave for their winter home in South America. They
usually are gone by the last of August.

The male is entirely blue-black which may look purple in some lights,
while the female and young birds show lighter breasts with duller head
and back.

A Purple Martin is a social bird and likes to nest in colonies. A series
of gourds, boxes or a fancy many-roomed martin house all seem to offer
an equal appeal to this bird; however, he prefers they be placed on a
pole well above the ground and in an open space where he can come and go
without dodging limbs. A pond or lake in the neighborhood is desirable.

  He flaps and sails,
  Goes here and there
  To catch the bugs....
  His daily fare.


Blue Jay
_Cyanocitta cristata_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

You may admire him greatly or hate him intensely. It depends on what he
is doing when you form your opinion. A flock of these blue and white
birds with large crests and black chin-straps, add color and cheer as
they pass thru the timber. They often are conversing in a series of soft
musical tones which are pleasing to the ear when all is serene. Moments
later they discover a sleeping owl, cat or snake and the flock changes
into a group of loud-mouthed bullies. Such is the way of a Blue Jay.

During the nesting season, this bird which is larger than a Robin, shows
the darker side of his character, for then he destroys the homes of many
nesting birds, eating both eggs and young of the smaller species. You
can hate him and all of his kin for such habits, but this is nature and
nature is never mild. Later you will find him hiding pecans, acorns or
sunflower seeds under leaves, sticks or moss. Then you will learn that
he does a lot of good, for many of these seeds are never eaten but grow
into new trees or bushes. It is just as natural for Blue Jays to hide
these acorns as it is for squirrels to do the same thing. His alarm
notes often save animals and birds for they have learned to heed his
warning call.

  He dresses like a dandy
  With chin-strap from his crest....
  Sometimes you must admire him,
  At times he is a pest.


Common Crow
_Corvus brachyrhynchos_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

In many areas there is no other with which this 19-inch all-black bird
could be confused. His steady wing beat, his characteristic call of
“caw” or “ca-ah,” his flocking habits in fall and winter help to
identify him. Along the Atlantic and Gulf shores, the smaller Fish Crow
is found, while on the western prairies the White-necked Raven which is
slightly larger, may be confused with the Crow. Mountainous areas and
seacoasts also have the Common Raven, which is much larger, but all show
the color pattern of the Common Crow. The last 3 birds have different
calls and all are more inclined to mix a lot of sailing in their flight.

But what about the crow? We know he robs nests of eggs and young, we
know that he eats corn, peanuts, pecans, in fact anything he can lay his
beak on, and he is cunning enough to get his share. But do we give him
credit for the huge crop of grasshoppers, crickets, moths and weed seeds
he consumes? We may be blaming him unduly, for many of his food habits
are beneficial.

In winter they gather in huge roosting flocks and can be seen going to
and from these roosts. They co-operate with each other both in finding
food and seeking protection. Their system must be admired for they are
doing all right.

  We feel quite sure
  That you all know
  If he says “Caw”
  He is a crow.


Black-capped Chickadee
_Parus atricapillus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Altho smaller than a sparrow, this little bird is hardy. He does not
leave his summer home and move to a warmer climate just to dodge the
snow and sleet. You will find him feeding just as happily in a snowstorm
as on a warm spring day, always consuming small insects, their eggs or
larvae. Exploring the trunks of trees, hanging upside down on the end of
a limb, or hunting larvae on tender leaves, it makes no difference to
this sharp-eyed bird. Those of you who feed birds will find the
chickadee one of your friendliest customers, for he relishes peanut
butter, suet, sunflower seeds or doughnuts and often gets tame enough to
eat from your hand.

He shows a whitish line on the edge of his wing which is lacking on the
slightly smaller Carolina Chickadee which has a southern range. The
latter bird uses a 4-note call “fe-be-fe-bay,” while the black-capped
uses only “phe-be.” The normal chick-a-de-de-de call of the black-capped
seems a little lower and slower than that of his southern cousin.

Both birds nest in cavities in stumps or trees, some being old nesting
sites of the Downy Woodpecker, while others are prepared by the
chickadees themselves. This seems quite a task for so small a bird.

  A friendly little urchin
  With black on cap and chin.
  He will become quite chummy
  If you are kind to him.


Tufted Titmouse
_Parus bicolor_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This sparrow-size cousin of the chickadee has a tuft of feathers which
gives him a striking appearance. The tuft, nape, back, wings and tail
are slate gray, while the cheek, throat, breast and belly are white with
a pinkish-brown patch just below the wing. Habits are similar to
chickadees and he often can be found feeding in loose flocks with these
and other small birds such as Downy Woodpeckers, nuthatches and Brown
Creepers. Together they form a useful team for what one species misses
by his method of feeding, one of the others will find by a slightly
different method.

They nest in holes in trees or even a bird box to their liking. They are
noisy birds and their song is much louder and clearer than you would
expect to hear from such small singers. The song consists of a series of
whistled notes which sound like “pet-er” or “pet-o,” the first note
usually slightly higher. Other notes remind you of a Carolina Wren or a
Kentucky Warbler but the phrasing and tempo soon lead you to proper
identification.

A titmouse enjoys a well-stocked feeder and is a nice neighbor for he
enjoys singing and the clear whistled notes add a touch of nature to a
cold winter day.

  How can a bird
  As small as he
  Sing half so loud?
  We cannot see.


Brown Creeper
_Certhia familiaris_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

There is no other bird quite like the Brown Creeper. He is well named
for his brown plumage with lighter stripes gives him perfect protection
as he climbs spirally up some rough-barked tree. His curved bill, sharp
claws and long tail, all serve a distinct purpose in helping him find
his food. Hackberries or other rough-barked trees serve as his hunting
grounds and there you will find him checking the cracks and crevices as
he starts from the base and works upward, sometimes checking the larger
limbs, but often dropping down to the base of the next tree after
reaching the lower limbs. Insects, their eggs and larvae form the major
portion of his diet but he will not spurn suet on your feeder.

Brown Creepers are found in this area only in winter, when they can be
found in loose flocks along with kinglets, chickadees, nuthatches, Downy
Woodpeckers and titmice, all working together to rid the trees of the
insects which are wintering there.

His note is a weak lisp which can be confused only with the series of
similar notes uttered by the Golden-crowned Kinglet. He nests under a
strip of loose bark or occasionally in knotholes or well-hidden spots
around larger trees.

  His brown-striped coat
  Is hard to see,
  As he climbs spirally
  Up your tree.


House Wren
_Troglodytes aëdon_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Most Americans seem to have fallen in love with the House Wren. It could
not be his beauty for he lacks the distinctive markings found on other
birds, even other wrens. Even in good light you see only a small
grayish-brown bird with lighter underparts. It is surely not his size
for he is smaller than a sparrow. His song is a sort of spontaneous
outburst of notes which give you more quantity than quality, with a
liberal helping of scolding notes, so it is not his vocal efforts. He is
not a good bird neighbor for he often punctures the eggs of other
nesting birds in his area. It must be his independence that has won him
favor.

No other bird finds such an assortment of nesting boxes, all sizes,
shapes and colors, some homemade, others purchased. Some he will use,
while others offer no attraction. He may pass up a well-placed wren
house to build in the pocket of an old coat hung in a shed. He likes
boxes 8 to 10 feet above ground, not hidden by limbs.

He prefers low shrubs, piles of brush or wood, or even open spots in
heavy timber, for there he finds the insects and small spiders which
form the major part of his food. Most of his hunting is either on or
near the ground while nesting sites are seldom above 12 feet. He runs to
large families and more than one brood is reared.

  His brownish hue, his bubbling song,
  His impish little ways,
  You like to have him ’round your home
  To gladden summer days.


Mockingbird
_Mimus polyglottos_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

A trim, robin-size pale gray bird which shows extensive white patches on
the wings and outer tail when in flight. These markings will identify
this bird in winter when you find him feeding on whatever fruits or
berries he can locate. He does not choose to migrate when a good supply
of red cedar, bush honeysuckle, multiflora rose, persimmon, bittersweet
or other such seeds are available. Raisins or currants will entice him
to your feeder but he is too big a bully to make a good guest for he
chases other birds away.

In summer he adds other little habits which soon bring him to your
attention. First, his song, a medley of rich notes which include not
only his own song, but a mimicked version of other songs and sounds
which he has heard. These are usually repeated 2 or 3 times and then he
goes to a new series, which may be harsh or pleasing. His song has more
variety of notes than the Brown Thrasher or Catbird. He prefers high
perches when singing, such as aerials, chimneys, windmills, trees,
buildings or water towers. He always is doing unusual things like
leaping into the air or going thru other antics which show his
well-marked plumage.

He likes to nest in arbors, shrubs or trees which offer protection to
his bulky home which is often only a few feet above the ground.

  With clearest tone or rasping call,
  With notes unheard in music hall
  They form the mocker’s roundelay
  On moonlight night or sunny day.


Catbird
_Dumetella carolinensis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This trim member of the mocker family leaves no doubt as to his
identity. No other bird has a uniform slate-gray plumage with a black
cap and rusty brown under-tail coverts. It makes little difference if
you miss the rusty marking under the tail, or even see the bird, for he
soon discloses his identity by his song. The normal song consists of a
series of musical phrases, well seasoned with catlike mews, often heard
coming from some concealed perch in shrubs or low bushes, for there is
the favorite home of the catbird.

Altho slightly smaller than a Robin, he consumes many insects while
waiting for the small fruit and berries to ripen. Mulberries and wild
cherries are relished in season, while strawberries, blackberries or
grapes are not overlooked.

He prefers low shrubbery or vines for nesting and builds rather a bulky
structure of sticks, twigs, paper, rags or leaves, lined with finer
material. Two broods during the summer keep the parents busily engaged.

When trying to impress his mate, he often fluffs his feathers out until
he looks much larger, sticks his head up with mouth open and struts
around like a clown. It is just a part of nature.

  In brushy thickets or some low tree
  A slate-gray bird is what we see.
  And oft we listen, wondering how
  He can repeat the cat’s me-ow.


Robin
_Turdus migratorius_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

There is no reason to tell you this bird is robin-size except that we
would like you to remember he is 10 inches long. This helps when making
a comparison with other birds. This medium-size member of the thrush
family makes himself at home on your lawn, in your garden, pastures or
fields. There you will see his reddish breast, dark head and back, all
distinctive in sunlight or shadow. Yes, you can spot a Robin anywhere.
The young have spotted breasts which is typical of the thrush family.

Robins are early risers and start singing as soon as the first faint
glow shows the approach of a new day. Robins do most of their feeding on
the ground. There you will see them making a short run, then stop, look
and listen. They seem to be able to hear their prey, for you will notice
them digging worms and insects from depths which would make them
impossible to see. These birds sometimes add small snakes, minnows or
frogs to their diet of worms, insects and fruit. Hackberries, persimmons
and red cedar seeds help carry them thru the winter.

Robins often winter rather far north and are one of the first migrants
to make an appearance in spring.

  Your travels bring you wide acclaim
  For everyone can call your name.
  They count the days ’til you appear
  For then they feel that spring is near.


Eastern Bluebird
_Sialia sialis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This small thrush, only slightly larger than an English Sparrow, is held
in high esteem by those who have made his acquaintance. Unlike the
Hermit and Wood Thrushes which sing in the seclusion of deep forests,
the Bluebird prefers open country with scattered trees. Old apple
orchards make choice locations for usually they have a number of old
woodpecker holes for nests.

Unlike most thrushes, he is not noted for his song, however his
frequently heard “tur-wee,” gives a restful assurance that all is well.
The male has bright blue upper parts with reddish-brown breast. The
female is duller with only the wings and tail showing blue with duller
brown breast. The young have spotted breasts like others of the thrush
family.

Bluebird houses will help bring this bird to your community but remember
that the opening should be smaller than 1½ inches which will admit
Starlings, while low sites such as fence posts discourage the English
Sparrow. These birds cover a large area in their search for food so
houses should be spaced accordingly.

Grasshoppers, crickets, cutworms and other insects form a major portion
of the food while small fruits and berries also are relished. Like the
Robin, he often spends his winters with us.

  A little bit of heaven
  Seems a part of your array,
  So blue above with brownish breast
  How can you dress so gay?


Golden-crowned Kinglet
_Regulus satrapa_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Energetic little birds, smaller than House Wrens, the Golden-crowned
Kinglets spend the winter busily engaged in searching the twigs and
branches for insect eggs or larvae. There they join mixed flocks of
chickadees, Brown Creepers, nuthatches and Downy Woodpeckers, all
working together to protect our trees. He is easily identified for he
has the habit of flicking his wings as he moves thru the branches. His
short, slightly forked tail, white line over the eye, distinct wing
bars, all seem dull when compared to the golden crown, edged with black.
This gives an artistic touch to his olive-gray plumage. The female shows
a yellowish crown. The only bird with which he can be confused is the
Ruby-crowned Kinglet which shows a distinct eye ring. He flashes his
ruby crown only when excited.

Like the Brown Creeper, this bird has a faint lisping call which usually
is given in a series of from one to 3 notes, not the single note of the
creeper.

They often feed in low bushes or shrubs, sometimes on the ground and
seem to have little fear of man and will permit a close inspection. When
feeding high in the trees, their small size gives you a clue to their
identity.

  Oh, little king with crown of gold
  How do you stand the winter’s cold?
  If I were small as you, I know
  I’d travel south and miss the snow.


Loggerhead Shrike
_Lanius ludovicianus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

A gray bird with a black mask over the eyes, black wings which show a
white patch when flying, and a black tail with white margins, all help
identify this shrike. His head seems large when compared to his trim
body, he has a hooked beak, the under plumage is white. If there is any
doubt, watch him fly from one perch to another. He drops down near the
ground, flies rapidly and then zooms up to his next location. Another
habit is flicking his tail like a Phoebe when he alights.

This bird likes open fields, pastures, grassy or weedy grounds with
handy perches where he can get a good view of his surroundings. He has
good eyes and any small snake, mouse or grasshopper will cause him to
investigate. He often hovers before striking and catches his prey with
his strong beak, for his feet are not equipped with heavy claws like
most predators. This also makes it necessary for him to impale his prey
on thorns, barbed wire or some other pointed object where he can cut it
with his sharp bill.

Shrikes seem to prefer thorny trees for nesting, but will use whatever
is available. Most nests are rather low and are bulky structures.

These birds kill more food than they consume and would be held in better
repute except for the habit of killing other birds.

  A “butcher-bird,” you hear folks say
  For you use thorns to hang your prey.
  Now we don’t mind, your catching mice,
  But killing songbirds isn’t nice.


Starling
_Sturnus vulgaris_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Previous to 1890, this bird was unknown in America. Then a few pairs
were released in New York City and now look at them! Starlings are
everywhere. When walking around your yard or field he appears to be
black with a short tail, pointed wings and a sharp pointed beak which is
yellow in summer and brownish-black in winter. On closer inspection you
will find that he is a little smaller than a Robin, greenish with
speckled plumage in fall and winter, which develops into greenish-purple
in spring. In flight he flaps and sails much like a Meadowlark but his
short tail and wing pattern are distinctive. The young are brownish with
lighter throats.

Many of the Starling’s feeding habits are beneficial for he eats many
worms and insects which he finds by turning over leaves or probing with
his sharp bill. The fact that he likes fruit on occasion is not in his
favor for he likes to travel in flocks and it takes a lot of fruit to
feed a flock of Starlings.

Starlings have not learned to migrate and large flocks often gather
about buildings to roost, and what noisy, dirty lodgers they are.
Perhaps the worst habit is that of taking over all the available nesting
sites before our native birds arrive in spring. Every hole, crack or
cranny is occupied, so where are they to go?

  When foreigners invade our land
  They sometimes get clear out of hand.
  So leave them all where they belong
  And then you’ll know they’ll do no wrong.


Red-eyed Vireo
_Vireo olivaceus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Unlike some of his relatives which prefer low bushes and shrubs, the
Red-eyed Vireo prefers heavily-wooded areas. Where forests occur, he is
the commonest bird. Clearing of timber reduced much of his habitat, but
any grove of trees will furnish a home for this species. His numbers are
limited only by the area of the wooded section.

Vireos are more often heard than seen for they feed slowly thru the tops
of high trees, but have an endless series of notes and sing during the
hot summer days when other birds seek shelter. The song consists of a
series of short phrases sometimes rising, sometimes falling, as if the
bird were talking to himself, even answering his own questions, with a
distinct pause between. Some of these notes have a robin or tanager-like
quality, but the repeated song soon places the bird.

When you see this sparrow-size bird, you will find that he has a clear
white line over the eye, bordered with black. This is his only
outstanding mark for he has no wing bars. His general appearance is
greenish-gray above, white below with a greenish-yellow tinge on the
sides and flanks. His red eye is not distinct enough to make a good
field mark. His main diet consists of leaf-eating worms.

  With others hushed
  By summer’s sun
  He still sings on
  As tho ’twere fun.


Myrtle Warbler
_Dendroica coronata_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The Myrtle Warbler is a member of a colorful family of American birds
most of which are smaller than sparrows, have thin pointed bills, are
more active than vireos. They are often referred to as the butterflies
of the bird world. The Myrtle Warbler is presented because he is the
first to arrive in spring, often before the leaves arrive to hide him
from view. This 5½-inch bird has 4 yellow marks which will identify him:
the crown, rump and each side of the breast. He appears darker than most
warblers, being blue-gray above, white below with black marks across the
breast and back beneath the wings. The white throat and 2 white wing
bars offer contrast. Females and young lack the brilliant markings of
the male, but the yellow rump patch will identify the birds. The white
throat distinguishes this from other warblers which show a yellow rump.

This bird is a migrant since he prefers to nest in the evergreens of
Northern United States and Canada. He feeds on insects and larvae which
infest our trees but captures many flying insects when available. Often
he winters farther north than you would expect to find warblers and then
feeds on small berries. Myrtle or bayberries are a favorite food and the
name of the bird indicates its fondness for these berries.

  The first to greet us in the spring,
  The last to leave in the fall,
  Four yellow spots before your eyes
  Is proof he’s paid a call.


Yellowthroat
_Geothlypis trichas_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The adult male of this species wears a black mask over his eyes and is
only 5¼ inches long. The female lacks the mask but has a yellow throat,
white belly and olive-brown head, back, wings and tail which identify
the birds.

They nest over a wide area, favorite habitat being bushy thickets near
water. He is quick to resent any invasion of his privacy and uses a
variety of scolding notes to let you know how unhappy he is. His
movements are wren-like and hurried and his black eyes fairly sparkle to
show his excitement. He soon vanishes into the undergrowth but you will
have a chance to learn his call which sounds like “witchity, witchity,
witchity,” or “witcheree, witcheree, witcheree,” usually repeated 3
times.

While all warblers are beneficial, the Yellowthroat perhaps leads the
list for he feeds over a large area and in a variety of places.
Cankerworms in your orchard will soon bring this bird for they along
with fall webworms, are his favorites. Other caterpillars, plant lice,
leaf-hoppers, grasshoppers, flies and beetles add variety to his menu
and protection to the farmer.

They nest on or near the ground, the female builds the nest and hatches
the young, but he is a devoted father and helps gather juicy worms to
feed the offspring.

  A singing bandit he might be
  Who seems to say just “witchity.”
  Near wooded draws he likes to stay
  And there he spends the summer’s day.


House Sparrow
_Passer domesticus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Whether you call him an English Sparrow or a House Sparrow, makes little
difference. He is not a sparrow, nor can we blame the English for the
vast population of these birds found within our borders. The fact that
it is a weaver-finch would indicate that Africa was the original home of
this species. This bird has been introduced into many countries and he
soon adapts himself to any surroundings. The record shows that 8 pairs
were introduced in Brooklyn in 1850 but did not survive. Two years
later, more were imported and now they are at home over a wide range.

Since we have referred to this bird for comparative size, it is well
that we keep him in mind. His length runs from 5½ to 6¼ inches with a
wingspread of 9½ to 10 inches. The male is rather colorful with his gray
crown, chestnut nape, white cheeks, black throat and chest, brown back
and gray-white belly. The thick finch-like bill, the slightly notched
tail which they flick often, the habit of hopping when feeding on the
ground—all help in identification. The young and winter males resemble
the female which is a dull-brown above with gray-white below and a pale
stripe over the eye.

They consume quantities of insects but will eat almost anything
available.

  He sits and chirps all day long
  With what to him must be a song,
  He thinks your home a place to nest,
  Which wins for him, the name of pest.


Eastern Meadowlark
_Sturnella magna_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This chunky robin-size bird is perfectly at home in fields and pastures.
There he is easily recognized as a plump brown-streaked bird with yellow
underparts and a black crescent on the breast like a black V. The short
tail shows white on each side and is flicked nervously. The crown shows
black and white stripes. They fly low over the fields with a series of
flaps and sails and walk around short-grass meadows in their search for
insects.

They are not larks but are closely related to Starlings, as shown by
their scientific name and their resemblance to the invading flocks of
these aliens. Unlike their relatives, Meadowlarks have no bad habits and
feed largely on cutworms, grasshoppers and beetles which are found in
their chosen habitat.

The Eastern Meadowlark has a loud clear song often referred to as
“spring is here,” while his western cousin, slightly smaller in size,
produces a series of whistled notes and warbles which is quite pleasing
to the ear. Both have a series of chattering notes which is typical.
Neither is hesitant about singing and they add much to their
surroundings by the quality of song.

They not only should be protected but encouraged to nest around farms
for they more than pay their way.

  With yellow breast and black cravat
  Whoever asks, “What bird is that?”
  For meadowlarks range far and near
  And sweetly whistle, “spring is here.”


Red-winged Blackbird
_Agelaius phoeniceus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

A black bird with a bright red shoulder patch identifies the adult male.
Females and young are a heavily streaked gray-brown while young males
are brown with an orange wing patch. In fall and winter the brilliant
red shoulder patch is not so apparent, sometimes reduced to only a line.

These numerous birds are slightly smaller than Robins and are abundant
along ditches, ponds, lakes or other marshy areas where they nest in
rushes, cattails or small bushes surrounding water. Irrigation has
increased their habitat until they are one of our common birds. Vast
flocks spend the winter in southern marshes.

While nesting in swamps or other low areas, they range widely in search
of insects and larvae and account for many which would be injurious to
crops. In fall they feed heavily on weed seeds and waste grain. Huge
flocks are not welcomed in the unharvested rice fields of the south.

Feeding habits make him a good neighbor to everyone in his northern
range before he joins the flocks of Starlings and other birds which
flock to the southern areas.

The male is a bigamist on occasion and often entices more than one mate
to share his chosen marsh.

  A flash of red
  You’re bound to see
  And then you’ll hear
  His “oka-l-e-e-e.”


Brown-headed Cowbird
_Molothrus ater_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The coffee-brown head and black body of the male are distinctive, but in
fall the brown head shows more of a purplish tinge. The young, while
larger than sparrows, could be confusing since they are olive-brown
above with a buffy scaled appearance. The underparts show brown
streaking. The female is dusky gray.

They feed near grazing animals and consume quantities of insects which
are disturbed by the herds. In winter they join other flocking birds for
migration. Then they feed on small seeds.

They build no nest but lay eggs in the nests of vireos, warblers,
sparrows or flycatchers and depend on the foster parents to rear the
young. The white, evenly speckled-with-brown egg usually hatches before
the eggs of the rightful owner and the young Cowbird immediately tries
to push the other eggs or young out of the nest. He wants all the food
for himself. Some birds destroy the unwanted eggs, others desert their
own nest or build a new structure which covers the eggs, but most
species raise the young Cowbird. Such habits are not condoned in the
best bird circles.

Gurgling notes of the male offer a soothing note to nature, when flocks
of these birds join other blackbirds in the treetops. The female has a
chattering note which is distinctive.

  “No moral standards”
  Man would say,
  But nature governs
  And birds obey.


Summer Tanager
_Piranga rubra_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The rosy red plumage of the male Summer Tanager is helpful in
identification for he is smaller than the Cardinal and lacks the tuft
and black face patch of the latter. Females, which resemble orioles, do
not have the sharply pointed bill of the oriole and are richer colored
than the female Scarlet Tanager, being almost an orange-yellow below.
She is olive-yellow above with no wing bars. The wings are greener than
those of her near relative. Young males often show a mottled pattern of
reds and yellows before attaining the rosy red hue of the adult.

They prefer a rather open forest such as is found on hillsides. A dead
treetop makes an ideal perch while singing or catching insects on the
wing. The song is a rather melodious series of notes which reminds one
of a Robin. Alarm notes are a distinctive series of chippy-tuk-tuk
notes.

These birds feed rather deliberately thru the trees and destroy many
insects and leaf-eating larvae which they encounter. Their nest is
usually far out on the limb and at least 10 feet above the ground. They
spend winters in South and Central America. The breeding range does not
extend as far north as that of the Scarlet Tanager.

  We like your color, rosy red
  We like to hear you, overhead.
  In open woods, we know you’ll rest
  For there your mate conceals her nest.


Cardinal
_Richmondena cardinalis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Most folks call him a “redbird,” which is only natural. The male is
entirely red except for the black face. No other redbird shows a tuft or
has such a heavy, orange bill. The female is dressed more in keeping
with family duties for yellowish-brown plumage offers more protection to
her and the secluded nest. She always shows a reddish tinge especially
on the crest, wings and tail. These markings combined with the conical
reddish beak, leave little doubt as to identity. The young resemble the
female.

The Cardinal, slightly smaller than a Robin, can be found in almost any
area which includes thickets or tangled vines for protected nesting
sites. Hedges, plum thickets, woodland borders, city parks, swamps or
around your home, any or all are used on occasion. He likes to feed on
small seeds which means he must venture into the open, but he wants
cover handy, when predators arrive.

In summer the Cardinal feeds heavily on insects and larvae but seeds and
small fruit form the major portion of his diet. He is fond of sunflower,
melon or squash seeds and will be among the first to visit your feeder
when these seeds are offered. If no regular feeder is available, he will
accept food when placed on the ground or snow.

  With brilliant coat and whistled song,
  A thing of beauty all day long.
  A joy forever you will find,
  If you will keep his wants in mind.


Dickcissel
_Spiza americana_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This sparrow-size finch is not too easy to describe for plumage varies.
There is no doubt about the singing male for he gets his name from his
song and reminds you every few seconds that he is a Dickcissel. He shows
a yellow breast with a black spot and except for size resembles a
meadowlark. Telephone wires, fences or weeds offer good perches and
there you will find him with head back and tail hanging down as he
repeats his song. A reddish-brown wing patch is a good field mark in
some seasons. The female is much like the female English Sparrow but is
lighter with a tinge of yellow and a lighter eye-line.

Dickcissels are common around fields or meadows and seem to be
especially fond of alfalfa fields for they offer a good assortment of
beetles, bugs and hoppers on which the bird thrives. Larvae and small
seeds round out the diet and make this bird a useful neighbor on any
farm.

They nest on or near the ground. This makes them victims of various
predators which range thru such areas. Cowbirds seem to rely on these
birds to raise their young for they are often found feeding the young
imposters. They wander widely in both nesting and winter range and
frequently appear where least expected.

  In summer when the days are long
  You’re bound to hear his cheerful song.
  In open fields, he likes to stay
  And calls his name thruout the day.


American Goldfinch
_Spinus tristis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The American or Common Goldfinch often is called “wild canary.” Altho he
is not a canary, his small size, color and twittering notes remind
people of their pets. While smaller than sparrows, these birds are
rugged and winter over much of their nesting range. Their habit of
flocking and tendency to feed on weed seeds makes them easily found.

The male of this species is a rich lemon yellow with a small black mark
above the bill, black wings and tail. The wings show distinct white bars
especially in winter when the yellow has faded to the more somber hue of
the female. The tail is forked with white tips on the outer feathers and
coverts. The bill is yellow.

Goldfinches are noted for their cheerful dispositions. A feeding flock
can be heard uttering twittering conversational notes even in winter.
Spring brings the notes of their beautiful but varied song which usually
can be identified as “tzee,” or “per-chic-o-ree,” which is the song
heard when the birds pass overhead.

Goldfinches nest late in the season and use quantities of thistle down
or similar fiber in building their compact homes. Fondness for thistles,
both seeds and down, often gives him the name “thistle-bird,” and many
artists picture him perched on this colorful weed.

  He’s never happy when alone
  But with the flock is prone to roam.
  You often hear his questioning “tzeee”
  In flight he says, “per-chic-o-ree.”


Slate-colored Junco
_Junco hyemalis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The sparrow-size Slate-colored Junco or the “snowbird,” as he frequently
is called, is only a winter visitor in most areas. But what a welcome
guest he is! The white belly and outer tail feathers add distinctive
marks to his slate-gray plumage. The bill is pinkish white. Females and
immature birds are duller and sometimes show a pinkish-brown tinge on
their backs and sides.

Juncos can be found around weed patches, hedges or sheltered corners of
fields, where they spend much time in feeding on weed or grass seeds
which provide their winter diet. Even fallen seeds are not overlooked
for these birds do much of their feeding on the ground. They sleep in
evergreens, sheds or other protected areas which shelter them from the
cold and snow. They often visit feeders for small seeds provided by bird
lovers.

Their notes are hard to describe but have a musical smacking or clinking
note or series of notes which once learned, are easily remembered. Their
song is a series of chipping notes much like those of a Chipping
Sparrow, but with more variation and more of a musical quality. This
song is heard when the first warm days of spring arrive. They nest in
either mountainous or northern regions for they enjoy cool climates.

  Slate-gray above and white below,
  Reminds us of a winter’s snow.
  The leaden clouds we see o’erhead
  Bring flaky snow, thru which we tread.

       INDEX       PAGE                 WHEN THE BIRDS MAY BE SEEN
                        Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.

 Blackbird,          22      ..oo XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX ooo. ..
   Red-winged
 Bluebird, Eastern   18 .... ..oo XXXX oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo ooXX XXXX oooo ....
 Cardinal            24 XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
 Catbird             17                  .. oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oo.
 Chickadee,          14 oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
   Black-capped
 Coot, American       5 ....   .. oXXX XXXX XXoo oooo ..     .. ooxx XXXX oooo ....
 Cowbird,            23 .... ...o XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX oooo ....
   Brown-headed
 Creeper, Brown      15 oooo oooo oooo o..                           ..oo oooo oooo
 Crow, Common        14 XXXX XXXX XXoo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo ooXX XXXX XXXX
 Cuckoo,              7                   . oooo oooo oooo oooo oo.. .
   Yellow-billed
 Dickcissel          24                  .. ooXX XXXX XXXX Xooo oo.. .
 Dove, Mourning       7 .... .... ooXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXoo oooo oo.. ....
 Goldfinch,          25 oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
   American
 Goose, Snow          2        .o XXXX oo.. .                         XXX oo.
 Grebe, Pied-billed   1             .. oooo ..         ..o oooo oooo oooo oo.. ....
 Hawk, Red-tailed     3 oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
 Hawk, Sparrow        4 oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
 Heron, Great Blue    1            ... oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo .... .
 Hummingbird,         9                  .. oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo .
   Ruby-throated
 Jay, Blue           13 oooo oooo oooo ooXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXoo oooo oooo oooo
 Junco,              25 XXXX XXXX XXXX XXoo                          oooX XXXX XXXX
   Slate-colored
 Killdeer             5    . ...o oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oXXo oooo oo.. ....
 Kingbird, Eastern   11                 .oo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
 Kingfisher, Belted  10 .... .... oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo ....
 Kinglet,            18 oooo oooo oo.. ...                            ... oooo oooo
   Golden-crowned
 Lark, Horned        12 oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
 Mallard, Common      2 XXXX XXXX XXXX oooo ...                 ...o oooo XXXX XXXX
 Martin, Purple      13             oo oooo oooo ooXX XXXX XXoo ..
 Meadowlark,         22 .... .... oooo XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXoo oooo oooo oooo ....
   Eastern
 Mockingbird         16 .... .... ..oo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo .... ....
 Nighthawk            8                   o XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXo o
 Owl, Screech         8 oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
 Phoebe, Eastern     11             oo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo o..
 Prairie Chicken      4 oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
 Robin               17 oooo oooo ooXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXoo oooo oooo
 Sandpiper, Spotted   6                  .. oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo o.
 Shrike, Loggerhead  19 oooo oooo oooo oooo XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX oooo oooo oooo
 Sparrow, House      21 XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
 Starling            19 XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
 Swallow, Barn       12                 ooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo ..
 Swift, Chimney       9                 ooX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX oo
 Tanager, Summer     23                     oooo oooo oooo .... ....
 Tern, Black          6                     oXXX XXoo       ooX XXXX oo
 Titmouse, Tufted    15 oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
 Vireo, Red-eyed     20                  .o oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oo
 Vulture, Turkey      3              . oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo ....
 Warbler, Myrtle     20                .ooo Xoo                      oooo .
 Woodpecker, Downy   10 oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
 Wren, House         16                .ooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo ..
 Yellowthroat        21                  oo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oo

  . The dot or period indicates the bird is occasionally seen.
  o The small o shows the bird is more frequently seen.
  X The capital X shows the bird is commonly seen.

For example, during the first 2 weeks of February, the Red-winged
Blackbird is rarely seen. During the last 2 weeks of February, it is
seen frequently, after which it is commonly seen until the end of
October. The table is based on bird census figures collected within a
radius of 50 miles of Topeka, Kansas. Your area may show different
results.


                             Kansas Farmer
                           Missouri Ruralist
                        The Topeka Daily Capital
                                  WIBW
                                WIBW-TV
                         The Kansas City Kansan
                        THE TOPEKA STATE JOURNAL
                            CAPPER’S WEEKLY
                            Michigan Farmer
                           _The Ohio Farmer_
                          PENNSYLVANIA FARMER
                               HOUSEHOLD
                           Capper’s _Farmer_


                       Capper Publications, Inc.
               EIGHTH AND JACKSON STREET, TOPEKA, KANSAS




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Introduction to Our Bird Friends,
Volume 1, by Lenwood Ballard Carson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INTRO TO OUR BIRD FRIENDS, VOL 1 ***

***** This file should be named 61319-0.txt or 61319-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/3/1/61319/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

